Hello everyone. This is uh my talk about uh the Neo Geo or at least the work I'm
doing on it. I run a small company called Backbit, which makes hardware for
vintage machines. Uh, currently I do it all myself, but uh, might need some help
soon. Okay, so this is the first product that
I ever worked on for Backbit when I was really just getting started with electronics. You can see the
breadboard. uh some board, someone who calls himself Dorktronic made the board. I bought that
on eBay as a breakout board. Um and then I used a Arduino like device called the
Tinsi. And then I made my own PCB. And
then uh this is the next version of that cartridge. I called it the Backbit Pro
cartridge. And I upgraded from the TNC to a STM 32 microcontroller.
And then it's got the pin edge there which attaches to adapters that can then
run in not just the Commodore 64 but um all the any 6502 machine any Z80 machine
um these other machines from the 80s. Uh it's the Fairchild channel F. There's
like a Signetics processor inside the Innerton and some NEC processor and the
Epoch Super Cassette Vision and so on and so on. Um, and so there's adapt these are some
of the adapters that will adapt the cartridge to go into any of these machines. And there's like there's like
almost 40 of them now. And so
I'm just going to go over a brief overview of what the Backbit Pro cartridge does.
And this is something I talked about in my talk last year here. So, it emulates ROM and RAM.
Um, it supports I'd like to say it supports all the good ones, all the good systems from the 80s, but um maybe some
of the more business-like machines it won't connect to, but um for playing games is pretty versatile on anything in
that's 8bit. Um and even systems that were 16 bit but came out in the 8bit era
like the Intelvision or the TI99. Um the cartridge itself is limited by
memory because it uses memory internal to the microcontroller which is about one it's a little more than a megabyte
but it's a megabyte that can be accessible um by the cartridge
and it's limited by wires. So there's a 16 bit address but address bus 8bit data
bus and some control signals. There's less control signals on some adapters
because it uses some of those pins to tell the cartridge which machine it's being plugged into.
And so here's the first real limitation of the cartridge and this is kind of what led to thinking about other
projects. Um I can easily talk to a machine most machines running at around 4 megahertz.
So that's around 200 nconds of latency. Um, but once the latency goes down, so
the Atari 7800 has a chip called Maria, which is the graphics chip, and that
runs, I believe it makes data requests around 7 megahertz, like half the NTSC rate.
And it's possible for me to serve data to it, but um I really have to cram for
optimizing ARM instructions to do that because it's it's using polling to serve
data. Um, and so I'm able to support all the
original titles on the Atari 7800, but some of the some of the homebrews uh don't work with this adapter.
And that's that's because um the logic becomes more complex when banking gets
used and I just can't optimize the instructions fast enough to emulate every style of banking.
And so this is when I started to feel like, oh, you know, I wish I could do better. Um, so one of the things I added to some
of the adapters was a pick co-processor. It I The reason I picked uh PIC was it's
different than SDM32. I just wanted to try on a different uh different kind of
processor. And so I'm using that on the MSX to emulate the the sound. um the sound
device present on some cartridges which is called SEC. It's a very small wave table. It's like a 32 byte wave table.
So you get these very short loop sounds. It's kind of like playing mods on an AmIGGA almost. Um
and then also for the 7800 I was able to emulate the Pokey sound chip
uh using that same processor. And then on the Aquarius, I was able to emulate the AY8910 sound chip, also called the
YM2149. It's a squarewave sound chip.
And then on the Odyssey 2, I was able to emulate the voice. And I didn't even need the PC co-processor for that. uh
because the machine runs so slow is able to code enough ARM instructions to just
output um a signal to a DAC present on the adapter like a serial DAC with like
six pins. Um so I was able to extend the functionality, you know, beyond kind of
the original capabilities of the the SDM32 microcontroller. Uh but I wanted
more. So I decided I had to get into FPGA. So over the last year basically
I've been trying to do things with FPGA trying to find the right project. That's
something that's that's something that you know maybe can't be done with a microcontroller or would require a much
faster microcontroller but why not just use FPGA instead. Um I never got into
like Raspberry Pi. Okay, I know that's a very popular thing, but as soon as I move from Arduino to SDM
microcontroller, I just wanted to architect everything around that. So, this is an adapter to go from the back
cartridge to the Famicom. And so I stuck a some uh bus
transceivers and an additional RAM chip because the NES it's like a regular 8 m
excuse me it's a regular 8-bit machine like times two because there's the CPU
bus and there's also the PPU the picture processing unit. Um, and so the backbit
cartridge itself only has enough signal lines to do the CPU. And this extends
that to be able to connect that RAM chip to
uh to the cartridge uh sorry to to the Famicom to serve it
the graphics it needs. And also the FPGA is able to manage different mappers
potentially, but I only ever got around to implementing one, the basic mapper, so I could play the 48K uh Super Mario
Brothers. Um, but I never went beyond that because I realized, I mean, you
know, it was it was fun to get to this point to make something that could play some games on the Famcom. But you look
at the Everdrive clones on AliExpress for like 20 bucks and it's like, okay, well, it's a hard bargain to compete
with. Um, so it just it just seemed like it wasn't going to be really worth the effort to try to go and implement all
the mappers and and plus there's a lot of parts on this adapter and the adapters are supposed to be simple and
cheap and so it that's why this remained a prototype.
So then my next FPGA prototype was going to be called the backid 2. So the SID is
the sound chip for the Commodore 64. And I had already emulated that with a STM
microcontroller on a product I call the back SID, which I don't sell anymore, which
I don't know if anyone cares if I open source because there's so many other options. Um, but the advantage to doing
that with FPGA is that it's cycle accurate. So instead of the sound being coming out around 30 kilhertz, it can go
the full one megabyte sampling rate of the system. So the square waves are a little more crisp. Um, it can even
support two channels at the same time. Um, but I didn't move this beyond a
prototype because the FPGA is that I'm using, it's called ICE 40. It's not
great at doing things like uh filters uh because it doesn't have built-in
floating point. So the SDM microcontroller I'm using actually has better floating actually it has a
floating point processor. Um and the way the data is moving it's going into the
microcontroller and then flowing to the FPGA. And the reason it does it that way is because the microcontroller is 5 volt
tolerant whereas the FPGA is not. Um, so I just stopped working on it
because I realized filters would be too too difficult to get working as good as
the original backid. So I just decided to stop there. And I figure there's already a lot of SID clones. So, you
know, kind of like the previous thing, there's kind of too much to compete with to make something really compelling and
better than what's out there. So, the next prototype I made was the 7800 cartridge, which is essentially the
original backpick cartridge with the adapter just built into the same board.
Um, and then it also has similar to what I did for the Famcom, it has u RAM and
level shifters built in on there so that it can serve so it can sort it can
support uh homebrews that are like one megabyte of code and one megabyte of graphics. Um, but I never fully
implemented it because I just realized uh there's other pretty good options out there like the 7800 game drive and I
don't know. I just don't want to be spending the rest of my life selling uh Atari 78 Curry 7800 cartridges. Uh,
forgive me. So, next um I think Keith will like this.
The Virtual Boy cartridge. So, I made this. I was able to get some games
running on it. Um, there are, as I, as far as I know, no other STbased card
solutions. I think someone on the internet is promising one and they haven't quite delivered yet.
Um, but my biggest frustration with this is it's got a proprietary connector that
you can't get anymore. Someone in Canada, I think, made a a reproduction one, but he charges quite a bit for just
the connector. So, just looking at the financials of it, it just didn't seem like it would it would make sense. Uh,
and also the case has to be really really small and thin, and I just didn't
think it was going to be something that would come out nicely with 3D printing. Uh, so for those issues, I decided not
to proceed. I know Keith still really wants it. So, I mean I that the option's
not closed, but it's just I'm one person and I can do so many things and to get
this off the ground, I would need someone to help out kind of more on the manufacturing side of things.
Okay, so here we are. Why Neo Geo? Um, on the left you can see an original Neo
Geo cabinet. Um, but that's not actually what I work with. I work with just a small little harness that goes inside
the bottom of the machine. It's called MVS unit. And then the other one you see
here is the AES and that's like the home console version. And I haven't I I'm not
officially supporting that yet, but it's something I'm considering. So there's these two two versions that are very
very similar hardware, but totally different cartridges. Okay. So why did I get started on Neo
Geo? So a year ago, I was here and a friend of mine named Danny, he said, "Why don't you try Neo Geo?" And I was
like, "That's a weird idea." And I thought, you know, and I thought that that just seems kind of crazy. And
uh but you know, here we are. Uh
and everyone knows arcade games are the best games, right? All this vintage computer nerds, right? Because the home
versions of most games are scaled down from the arcade versions of games. I should probably change that. the
original version of a game is often often better.
Um, so I thought this would be a challenge. Um, it's like 10 backbit
cartridges in one sort of. Um, there are Neo Geo cartridges
available, but there are some things they don't do. Like one thing is they uh most of them
take a long time to load a game like a minute unless they have the game already loaded into flash. So, if you want to
load like King of Fighters 2003 and then you want to load GRO Mark of the Beast
and you want to switch between them quickly, you either have to have those in the there's like I guess I guess
there's a cartridge that has like four flash slots, but if you had like fi like five or six different games and they all
you wouldn't be able to fit them in the flash slots. And so, this is a solution where you can So, I I thought I could
get things done faster than a minute to load a game. Um, there are also things that as far as
I know, no other uh flash cartridge for the Neo Geo supports, which is the multiplayer link cable where you can
connect two machines together and play a game like League Bowling. There's not a lot of games out there, but I figure
there might end up being more homebrews if there's a easy way to reproduce them.
Um there there is a port on the Neo SD that looks like a link cable, but as as far
as I can tell, it doesn't work. Um yeah, so this is the obvious.
Something is wrong with my brain because who would spend like a year of their life working on this machine. Um but
it's the reality is it's a good use case for FPGA. There are a lot of challenges compared to what I was doing before that
really needed FPGA to make this happen. And so I thought, well, what a great project because I learn best with
projects. Okay, so this is uh what the cartridge
looks like. Um there are 60 pins. These are your
regular 2.5 mm or 0.1 inch spacing pins
on which are you know same as most other cartridges from the 80s, but there's 60 on each side and there's also two
boards. So that's a total of 240 pins. Not all of those have to be interfaced
with, but a lot of them do. And then you can see I've outlined here
uh MPU. That's a very similar microcontroller to the one I used on the
back pro cartridge. But then I've got an ICE40 FPGA on both boards. I've got a
whole bunch of these PS RAM chips, pseudoatic RAM. I've got a big array of
level shifters and a big array of resistors.
Um, so that's what I just said. Um, the boards are linked by a flat flexible cable which I just had hanging around
for whatever reason because I was using the same cable uh in my Fairchild uh
channel F because if you multi if you if you take like 60 pins and divide it down
by five, you get 12 and there's 11 pins on the Fairchild channel F cable. And it
just it just fits perfectly. And because and just the way it lines up, it
it actually even though it's high even though it's five times the pitch, it actually works as a replacement. So I
took that same cable. It's also the largest off-the-shelf flat flexible cable you can get. So that cable links
the boards and so the microcontroller is able to talk to the FPGA on the other board through that cable.
Um, and then there's pseudoatic RAM, which I chose because it's possible to implement this in SD RAM, synchronous
dynamic RAM, but there's a lot of buses that have to access memory all at once. And the nice thing about the PS RAM is
that on the outside, it operates just like a traditional static RAM chip from way back when. So, it can serve data
pretty quick without having to send it a lot of series of commands. It also saved
me from having to get into the realm of high-speed PCBs, which is something
that's like over over like 25 or 50 megahertz. So, there are less electrical
issues that I would have to face by not use not interfacing with SD RAM
directly, which is which has been helpful for me to be able to just focus more on the software side of things,
making things work and the firmware and the veril log. Um, I did actually make a SD RAM
controller, but it didn't it didn't operate at high speed. So, that's kind of why I just said, "Okay, you know, I'm just going to go with PS RAM. I can
always cost reduce later by by using SD RAM."
Um, the microcontroller reads data from the SD card. It pipelines that data over
your 80 bits of datab bus to the FPGAs. The FPGAs play the traffic cop and
they're able to control the addressing. Um, and I'm able to save pins on the FPGA because the FPGA doesn't directly
interface with the data. The data lines of the RAM chips are connected to the the CPU, but not to the FPGA. And so,
I'm able to get away with um I think it's one of the largest uh so-called
flat pack chips. So, there's flat pack and there's ball grid array. And the ball grid array chips are more expensive
and they're a lot more expensive to assemble. And so I was able to get away with like one of the larger flat pack
FPGA chips. Okay, so this is this gets kind of into
the weeds and very technical what all the Neo Geo buses are. Um it's got a
main system clock of 24 MHz that gets divided down. The main processor is a Motorola 68000. It's got a Z80
co-processor, excuse me, Z80 co-processor. So, it's actually a very similar architecture to the Sega
Genesis, which had a 68000 and a Z80. Um, but it uses them quite a bit
differently. Um, the Motorola 68000 has a 16 bit data bus. The Z80 has a 8bit
data bus. There's a uh chip, I believe, which is exclusive to this machine
called the Yamaha YM2610, which has square wave sound. Uh, it's
got FM sound and it's also got two channels of ADPCM,
which I'll I'll say what those initials mean in a second. It's got graphics, an 8bit bus for
two-dimensional text and tiles, uh, which are used like for a HUD on top of
the screen, and then it's got sprites or characters, which is a 32-bit bus. And
so, if you add all those numbers together, you get 80 bits. So, it's not technically an 80-bit machine. I think technically it would be called a 16- bit
machine, but I have to serve 80 bits of data from the cartridge.
So, uh, okay. So, these are the individual buses. P stands for program ROM. It's
got a megabyte of fixed ROM that has to be served, which is like very similar to the Backbit Pro, but then it's got a
megabyte of of banked memory, which actually serves up to eight megabytes in
various configurations. And also in that same memory space uh on
a game like League Bowling it has to I have to emulate a chip called the HD6301
which is a Hitachi microcontroller which is a clone of like the 681 from Motorola
and that's something similar to what I worked with like on the Vectrex which is and I guess that's also similar to like
a Tandy color computer. Um, so some of the challenges I faced in
uh with this particular bus, the machine needs to see the cartridge there right after starting up. Um, and in
particular, if you're on a multi-lot machine, it needs to see it there or it just disables the whole slot. So, the
cartridge has the cartridge has to start up quickly. Um,
and the thing is my my cartridge takes longer to start up than a typical ROM
chip. Um, but the solution I went with is that there's a self- test on the Neo
Geo which actually takes a few seconds and that gives the cartridge plenty of time to start up. I did have an idea to
put a extra flash chip on there so there's something like ROM that can start up immediately, but that came with
some other issues which I'll explain in a minute. And so uh another challenge having a
birectional address bus. So I have very limited pins that I can work with.
There's an address bus from the Neo Geo coming in which connects to the RAM's
address bus. Um except if I get a memory request and
I have to translate that address to something else. Now I've inputed on the address bus what the Neo Geo is
requesting and then I have to output to the address bus what the RAM wants to interface with. And so doing that
quickly um I mean it adds cycles and it adds latency. And so that was that
that's still a little bit tricky because there's the the issue of latency constantly creeps up when changing
around the FPGA equations which I'll also go into in a second. So then implementing the 6301 processor.
So I found verarilog implementations of this processor except they didn't quite
work right because I don't think they exactly reproduced how there's built-in serial IO to this processor and I don't
think they correctly emulated it because at least from from dropping it in and trying to
get it to work it didn't work. So there were about 200 instructions
that I had to translate from 6301 code to Verarilog. Um and I combed through it
like 10 times just to make sure everything was right. And there are still issues but um they've mostly solved. Um and then lastly on this bus
there's a lot of signals to control the port access. There's uh output enable
and write enable which are data being sent one way or the other and those are multiplied by two because there's one to
specify the high eight bits of the bus and the low eight bits of the bus and so
deciding like which of these I could cut out became kind of an issue because they you can cut out a few but then there's
tradeoffs so that was a challenge. Uh, the Z80
uses a bus called the MR ROM, which I guess stands for music. It It's there to
interface with the Yamaha sound chip, and that's kind of all it does on the Neo Geo, and it's got some banked
memory. Um, on the Sega Genesis, the Z80 is used
for frequently for co- um for co-processing. It's not typically the
case on the dojo just because of the way it interfaces. There's like a 8bit bus between them, but I don't know, just the
way the interrupts work is just not super convenient to try to read data off it.
Um, but here's a challenge related to the program bus. If I tried to start the
machine with a flash chip that's going to the program bus, then the machine can
start right away, but the sound will cut out because the system expects both the
program bus and the the music bus to be active at the same time. And if they're
not, the Z80 can go into a crash state where it's like looping through RAM and
interrupts are turned off and it just it's just stuck. And so I kind of I decided again against
having that extra flash chip to have instant startup for the program ROM because it created more problems uh
crashing the music chip and there is the obvious solution of just enabling hardware tests to get around that.
So then the sound chip uses ADPCM which stands for adaptive differential uh
pulse code modulation. There's two buses because there's two kinds of ADPCM it
uses. There are six channels of 18 kilhertz sound that are it's 12
bits, but it's it's some kind of proprietary compression algorithm algorithm that I didn't have to deal
with directly. Um, but those 12 bits are transferred on 8bit bus. And then the
other channel is variable. It can go from almost nothing to up to 55 kHz and
it's 16 bit. So it's it's higher quality. It's used for playing like background music whereas other ch the
six channels are used for playing sound effects. Um the challenge with these buses is
that they're multipplexed. So there's three types of data that go across the bus. So there's a high address, a low
address, so like the upper eight bits of the address, lower eight bits of the address, and then data. And they're all
on the same eight butt eight, excuse me. See, I can't even talk right when I'm talking about this. Um, they're all on
the same bus. So, so data is going one way, data is going the other way, and there are these control signals that
tell you which way it has to go. So latency is really critical and there's
like changing the bus direction can can get pretty tricky just to get it just
right and on time. Um a challenge with this is uh accessing
the PS RAM. One of these audio channels the latency translates to about like
three CPU cycles. The other one it's longer, but then it's so long the PS
RAM, if you tell it to output data for over about four, wait, I guess four
microsconds, then it'll just die and stop working. So, so latency is an issue, but also
having something held too long is an issue. the MPX signal. So that stands
for multiplex. That signal comes from the Yamaha chip and tells you if it's
sending you the address, if it's sending the address or it's receiving data. And
that came with some challenges because it's a dual edge clock, which doesn't sound that scary, but for whatever
reason. So a a normal clock, you'll have one. So a clock is like a
square wave, and you'll have one edge that tells you when you should be doing something. But this is a dual-edge
clock. And I guess for whatever reason, because both those edges have to be
sharp edges, the there can be a bit of a high current um used from the chip. And
so at least in one version of the Neo Geo hardware, they put some inductors on on those lines to reduce current draw
when the signal changes, and then that creates some distortion on the line. So, long story short, I had to add some
resistors on those lines to reduce the ringing and distortion because that was creating some issues.
Okay, next bus, the fix layer. Um, this just specifies uh the graphics for the
characters that are drawn on the screen or the HUD. And the tricky part about this bus
is that there the the actual screen the virtual screen is bigger than the
physical screen. So there are hidden characters on the edges of the screen
that can be used for banking. Um and that extends the ability to have like up
to half a megabyte of memory addressed by the bus instead of like a quarter that.
Um, a challenge was to be able to draw a loading bar on the screen while it's
loading data into the memory on this bus meant that I had to add some extra
hardware uh like a multipplexer so that if it's loading a game, it uses uh it
serves characters that are internal to the FPGA and so it avoids having to
access RAM while it's loading data into RAM. Okay. And I think this is the last bus
I'll be talking about, the character bus. It's a 32-bit bus. And it has to
access it 16 times to generate a tile that's 16 by 16.
And I it's four bit color. So that's 16 colors uh out of a much larger palette.
And oh, so a challenge with this was that I had to put eight PS RAM chips because to
get the amount of uh memory that's used by the biggest Neo Geo cartridge, you
need 64 megabytes and the PS RAM chips uh tend to max out around 8 megabytes.
So that's why I had like I have a lot of PS RAM chips.
Um so obviously it's much more complex than the Backbit Pro cartridge. Um, a
big challenge was just deciding what signals to be cut because I couldn't based on the the pin counts of the FPGA
and the CPU. Everything's maxed out and I just had to decide what signals are
more important than others. What signals can I infer using other signals? What signals are just not that important? And
so that that's been a constant challenge. Reducing latency is a really big issue
particularly because so there are different size versions of the MVS
system. There's a version that that you can put one cartridge into and then there's two there's two slot, four slot,
six slot. So you could put six cartridges into a six slot machine. But those machines are much bigger. They
have a lot more hardware because they have to throttle the bus for every cartridge. So you figure there's 80 pins
of data that are all that are all multipplexed between six slots. And so
there there's a lot of hardware in there. It creates additional latency. It makes the power of the machine a little
bit less stable. And so that means I have to optimize my FPGA qu uh equations
quite a bit more. And the issue that that I've been dealing with over the last week, it's
called metastability. That's when a signal going into the FPGA has not settled on zero or one. It's
kind of in between. And you'd think, okay, well, you know, it'll just go to
one to the other and then you can process your equations. But that's not
exactly how it works because in the FPGA, if the input is not a zero or one, the output of that gate is also not a
zero or one. And so it can that unknown state can propagate down a series of
gates. And so then the latency between all those gates. And if you add all that stuff up, it can add up to quite a bit
of like a cascading problem of latency. And
that it was it's really tricky to understand and it's probably even trickier to to optimize against. But uh
but I'm learning fast. And okay, so what's next? Um, I have to
produce an injection molded case. Um, part of that is cuz I am kind of sick of
being a 3D printing factory. Um, and the other part of that is that a 3D printed Neo Geo cartridge is
possible, but it doesn't look that g it doesn't look that great. It's a bit rougher on the edges. And also I like to
use ABS and ABS warps quite a bit. Um the cartridges are around like six by
eight inches. Um the challenge with injection molding is a very high upfront cost. Uh over
time it's probably not that much more expensive than 3D printing, but everything has to be perfect the first
time. So I've spent the last couple months doing a lot of perfecting and I should be able to start that process by
the end of the month. Um, and then I want to get the PC board final because
once I send that out to however many hundred customers get the cartridge, I
don't want them all to have to return that and start all over. Um, so I'm
working out the remaining issues. It's amazing how beta testers can find things like instantly that you didn't see. Um,
and then a friend was able to let me borrow a six slot Neo Geo which revealed that it wasn't the latency wasn't good
enough to work on that. So, I've been working on that and it's it's getting better. It's almost there. And by almost
there means I'll I want to ship the cartridge in April because I already have pre-orders.
Um, so I might go through one maybe two more PC board revisions just to get everything perfect.
Um, and I'll probably cave to peer pressure and make an AES version of this
because there seems to be a lot of demand. Um, and the good thing about the AES is it's basically the same hardware.
It's just, um, the character bus, the sprite bus. Um, there is essentially a
chip that's inside the MVS hardware that is inside the AES cartridge. So, there's
just a tiny little bit more processing that has to happen.
Um, and so that's basically all I have. Now, I'm open for questions.
Anybody? Yes. How many um prototype boards have you done at this point?
So I think for the So there's two boards. There's the program board and the character board. The program board
has the P A and B buses. Um the character board has the the Z80
bus and the graphics buses. So the graphics board, the character board was easier. That's maybe like three, four,
five revisions. the program bust. I'm I've been calling the board's RC uh
since January and so I'm at RC4. It'll probably go to RC 5 or six before it's
final. Um but before that there was I don't know somewhere between five and 10
boards. So there's a lot a lot of tweaking. Um and I mean that's why I've been working on this for almost a year.
I mean, I only started working on it around maybe like May last year, but the
process of getting a new board is like it it's pretty quick, but the total turnaround between like diagnosing and
making changes and sending the new board is probably about a month. So, but yeah, I I have a big st I was thinking if I
should go through the stack and like take pictures of each, but but yeah, I literally have a box about this big of
of all my old boards. Any other questions? Yes.
Mhm. Um, sort of. So, I make a a chip tester
and I'm currently working on a new version. Um, but I made this product. I
called it the corn bit because on the Comeer 64 there's a chip called the kernel and I just thought the because
the chip had extra pins on the top and bottom uh it sort of looked like a corn cob. So I called it the corn bit. Um but
that was a flash memory chip on a chip with a few extra pins that could be
plugged in the chip tester to program it. And that was from SD card. So, it's
almost USB. Um, but yeah, it's not a it's not a big
focus right now because it's it's a lot of effort to build those things.
Anybody else? Yes. What's after? What's what what's after?
Oh god. Um, I don't know. I I uh the
focus is going to be in Neo. Oh, well, I mean, oh, this guy wants Virtual Boy.
Um, the chip tester. So, I'm I have my so-called version three of the chip
tester. Um, which compared to version two, it adds level shifters. It adds, um,
what else? Analog inputs. Um, it adds a drop in module for being able to test
chips, different voltages. So that's probably like my main focus after Neo
Geo is just finishing version three. Like the hardware is done. I just need to give it a case and do some testing.
Um but yeah, I mean like every project I like to do, I like to learn. Um so I'm
probably not going to be selling Neo G Neo Geo cartridges forever and I'm probably going to want to do something else afterwards. So I'm I'm always open
to ideas. Yes. How do you know when to uh start
taking pre-orders? Sounds like you started taking them even before all the
Right. So, I started taking pre-orders in January and I had been dragging my heels for a long time because I wanted
to get the hardware as perfect as possible. Um, but I started taking pre-orders um
partially to fund the pro I mean mainly to fund the product. uh because I'd
already invested a lot of time and money in it and my other products seem to be
selling a little bit less. So, I did need money to support continuing working
on it. And I also need money to start the expensive processes like the
injection molding um and to pre-order parts uh just in case there's a shortage on the parts.
And so I I really dragged my heels as long as I could uh where I was just like, "Okay, I really have to move
forward on this." And the pressure actually really helps me to to get things final. Like, you know, once I
announced pre-orders, I realized there's a lot of people who could help me beta test. And then, um, because I have
pre-orders now, I can make a whole bunch of beta cartridges that would normally be like, "Oh, I don't want to invest in
this." But, you know, now I can. So yeah, I mean really like that's like my
policy is like to drag my heels as long as I possibly can before I'm like, "Okay, I really need,
you know, a little bit of kickstarting here to finish the project."
Yes. Do you ever prefer any? Um I the one I'm using on this is Texas
Instruments. Um yeah, I go to Texas Instruments a lot for various chips.
They kind of I don't know, they're kind of like the gold standard with something that just works well and is also really
cheap. Um, but the level shifters I'm using, they um
you have to specify the bus direction. I know there's some where the bus direction is like automated and a bunch
of told me a bunch of people told me like don't use those because they're not as reliable. Um, yeah. The main trouble
with them is that the the time it takes them to figure out which way they're driving just significantly increases latency.
Yeah. I mean latency is everything because there's latency at every stage. There's latency at the level shifters.
There's latency in the FPGA latency and it's like all that adds up.
And um you could you could compare that to the architecture in the original cartridge,
which is typically like a custom gate array inside the original cartridge, which I'm kind of replicating. But I'm
also actually adding a lot of parts because that original gate array would be 5 volt native and it wouldn't have to
talk to a bunch of other chips. Like everything's on that one chip, you know, and it's they designed the silicone to
do exactly what they wanted. Whereas I'm using off-the-shelf parts. I'm not designing my own silicone yet. I would
say long term that's probably that's probably my biggest ambition long term is you know someday I'll make maybe make
my own silicone. So that might be fun. I'm curious about how much reverse
engineering you have to make versus how much documentation you will find. Um there's there's there's a heck of a
lot of documentation on neoev.org. There's a few hardto- read uh PDF scans
of old Neo Geo schematics and documentation. So, I I've used everything I can, but like having like
having this active community of people who want to share what they've discovered about the machine has been
really helpful, but um it's also it also takes a bit of of
groing to decipher that. So, I mean, like there were a bunch of border\d{1,2}:\d{2}\n revisions I made just to support titles
that have certain banking implementations where it wasn't obvious right away even
with even with all the the wikis out there. And so, I had to go through a
bunch of border revisions to figure, oh, I actually need this pin and I actually need this other pin.
Um, and I've also relied a lot on like um MAMEim uh MAME emulation source code which has
been really helpful for like um the encrypted ROMs because if if maim can play it then it's
you know it's been deciphered. Um but there's a couple situations where
even MAMEim doesn't quite uh get it perfect because MIME can change the
hardware. I can't change the hardware that it's plugged into. And so that that leads to more like what a mister would
do. Yes. Have you ever considered working in the Naomi system cartridges?
What is that? Also the arcade system that runs cartridges or they have a GD ROM which
is a DVD player that lo from DVD into system.
Uh not yet. It's similar to the um one of the other
gener
the the nice thing about the Neo Geo is that it's it's like a '9s system, but I
figure the hard like the hardware probably was designed a few years before
the system came out, at least much of the hardware. Um, so it's it's a little
bit evolved from the 8-bit system. So, you know, I'm kind of working my way through the eras slowly.
I mean, it's really it's really nice having those large dual inline package chips because that's that's something I can relate to right now.
Any other questions? Or I think we actually I guess we're we're out of time. So, thank you for coming and I'll
be here all weekend. [Applause]